Pgvector tutorial (#3101)
astronomer/docs: learn/airflow-pgvector.md

---
title: "Orchestrate pgvector operations with Apache Airflow"
sidebar_label: "pgvector"
description: "Learn how to integrate pgvector and Airflow."
id: airflow-pgvector
sidebar_custom_props: { icon: 'img/integrations/postgres.png' }
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import query_book_vectors from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-pgvector/query_book_vectors.py';

> [Pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector) is an open source extension for PostgreSQL databases that adds the possibility to store and query high-dimensional object embeddings. The [Pgvector Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-pgvector/stable/index.html) offers modules to easily integrate Pgvector with Airflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector) is an open source extension for PostgreSQL databases that adds the possibility to store and query high-dimensional object embeddings. The [pgvector Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-pgvector/stable/index.html) offers modules to easily integrate pgvector with Airflow.
```
Seems like lowercase is how postgres writes "pgvector" - worth double checking me, but regardless let's be consistent throughout.

Author: Oh, yes definitely! Even in the title of their repo Readme it is lowercase, will make sure to adjust :)

> In this tutorial you'll use Airflow to orchestrate the embedding of book descriptions with the OpenAI API, ingest the embeddings into a PostgreSQL database with pgvector installed, and query the database for books that match a user-provided mood.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you use Airflow to orchestrate the embedding of book descriptions with the OpenAI API, ingest the embeddings into a PostgreSQL database with pgvector installed, and query the database for books that match a user-provided mood.
```

- Check your vector database for existence of a unique key before running potentially costly embedding operations on your data.

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 30 minutes to complete (reading your suggested book not included).

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this tutorial, make sure you have an understanding of:

- The basics of pgvector. See the [README of the pgvector repository](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector/blob/master/README.md).
- Basic SQL. See [SQL Tutorial](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_intro.asp).
- Vector embeddings. See [Vector Embeddings](https://tembo.io/blog/pgvector-and-embedding-solutions-with-postgres/).
- Airflow fundamentals, such as writing DAGs and defining tasks. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md).
- Airflow decorators. [Introduction to the TaskFlow API and Airflow decorators](airflow-decorators.md).
- Airflow connections. See [Managing your Connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md).

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started).

> - An OpenAI API key of at least [tier 1](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits/usage-tiers) if you want to use OpenAI for vectorization. If you do not want to use OpenAI you can adapt the `create_embeddings` function at the start of the DAG to use a different vectorizer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An OpenAI API key of at least [tier 1](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits/usage-tiers) if you want to use OpenAI for vectorization. If you do not want to use OpenAI, you can adapt the `create_embeddings` function at the start of the DAG to use a different vectorizer.
```

> - An OpenAI API key of at least [tier 1](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits/usage-tiers) if you want to use OpenAI for vectorization. If you do not want to use OpenAI you can adapt the `create_embeddings` function at the start of the DAG to use a different vectorizer. Note that you will likely need to adjust the `MODEL_VECTOR_LENGTH` parameter in the DAG if you use a different vectorizer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An OpenAI API key of at least [tier 1](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits/usage-tiers) if you want to use OpenAI for vectorization. If you do not want to use OpenAI you can adapt the `create_embeddings` function at the start of the DAG to use a different vectorizer.
```
I don't think anybody would remember updating the param from reading about it in the prereqs, and you've already got a note about it below.

    ```text
    apache-airflow-providers-pgvector==1.0.0
    openai==1.3.2
    ```

3. This tutorial uses a local PostgreSQL database running in a Docker container. To add a second PostgreSQL container to your Astro project, create a new file in your project's root directory called `docker-compose.override.yml` and add the following. The `ankane/pgvector` image builds a PostgreSQL database with pgvector preinstalled.

    ```yaml
    version: '3.1'
    services:
      postgres_pgvector:
        image: ankane/pgvector
        volumes:
          - ${PWD}/include/postgres:/var/lib/postgresql/data
          - ${PWD}/include:/include
        networks:
          - airflow
        ports:
          - 5433:5432
        environment:
          - POSTGRES_USER=postgres
          - POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres
    # Airflow containers
      scheduler:
        networks:
          - airflow
      webserver:
        networks:
          - airflow
      triggerer:
        networks:
          - airflow
      postgres:
        networks:
          - airflow
    ```

> 4. To create an [Airflow connection](connections.md) to the PostgreSQL database, add the following environment variable to your `.env` file. If you are using the OpenAI API for embeddings you also need to add your OpenAI API key to `OPENAI_API_KEY`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. To create an [Airflow connection](connections.md) to the PostgreSQL database, add the following to your `.env` file. If you are using the OpenAI API for embeddings you will need to update the `OPENAI_API_KEY` variable.
```

    - The `enable_vector_extension_if_not_exists` task uses a [PostgresOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-postgres/versions/latest/modules/PostgresOperator) to enable the pgvector extension in the PostgreSQL database.
    - The `create_table_if_not_exists` task creates the `Book` table in PostgreSQL. Note the `VECTOR()` datatype used for the `vector` column. This datatype is added to PostgreSQL by the pgvector extension and needs to be defined with the vector length of the vectorizer you use as an argument. In this example we use the OpenAI's `text-embedding-ada-002` to create 1536-dimensional vectors, so we define the columns with the type `VECTOR(1536)` using parameterized SQL.
    - The `get_already_imported_book_ids` task queries the `Book` table to return all `book_id` values of books that were already stored with their vectors in previous DAG runs. 
    - The `import_book_data` task uses the [`@task` decorator](airflow-decorators.md) to read the book data from the `book_data.txt` file and return it as a list of dictionaries with keys corresponding to the columns of the `Book` table.

>     - The `create_embeddings_book_data` task is [dynamically mapped](dynamic-tasks.md) over the list of dictionaries returned by the `import_book_data` task to parallelize vector embedding of all book descriptions that have not been added to the `Book` table in previous DAG runs. The `create_embeddings` function defines how the embeddings are computed and can be modified to use other embedding models. If all books in the list have already been added to the `Book` table all mapped task instances are skipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The `create_embeddings_book_data` task is [dynamically mapped](dynamic-tasks.md) over the list of dictionaries returned by the `import_book_data` task to parallelize vector embedding of all book descriptions that have not been added to the `Book` table in previous DAG runs. The `create_embeddings` function defines how the embeddings are computed and can be modified to use other embedding models. If all books in the list have already been added to the `Book` table, then all mapped task instances are skipped.
```

:::tip

For information on more advanced search techniques in pgvector, see the [pgvector README](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector/blob/master/README.md).

:::

## Step 4: Run your DAG

1. Run `astro dev start` in your Astro project to start Airflow and open the Airflow UI at `localhost:8080`.

2. In the Airflow UI, run the `query_book_vectors` DAG by clicking the play button. Then, provide [Airflow params](airflow-params.md) for `book_mood`.

    ![Screenshot of the Airflow UI showing the input form for the book_mood param.](/img/tutorials/airflow-pgvector_params.png)

3. View your book suggestion in the task logs of the `print_book_suggestion` task:

    ```text
    [2023-11-20, 10:09:43 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:154} INFO - Book suggestion for 'A philosophical book about consciousness.':
    [2023-11-20, 10:09:43 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:154} INFO - You should read The Idea of the World by Bernardo Kastrup, published in 2019!
    [2023-11-20, 10:09:43 UTC] {logging_mixin.py:154} INFO - Goodreads describes the book as: A rigorous case for the primacy of mind in nature, from philosophy to neuroscience, psychology and physics. [...]
    ```

> ## Step 5: (Optional) Fetch and read the book

Author: 😊
